# Repository-14
English Research Paper - Anne Bradstreet's contribution to American Literature

The Influence of Anne Bradstreet’s Literary Work

Anne Bradstreet (1612- 1672) was born into a rich Puritan Family from which she got an education superior to that of other women of the 17th century (Baym 207). Since she started writing poems in the early 17th century, she is also regarded as the earliest English woman poet of the North America. Her poems describe only the internal themes of her life, while the poets of the 19th century expanded their views of poetry to external affairs which led to literary movements. Anne Bradstreet possessed a feminine nature, as depicted in her poems, which illustrates that she was a poet of 17th century when women were not empowered and enlightened enough to disclose their talent in the male world. Her poems usually have a common theme of religion, history, medicine, motherhood, and love. She had good knowledge and strong intellect with which she observed the world including nature, animals, and gender characteristics. These observations inspired her to write on domestic and religious themes. The most recurring theme described in her poems is mortality because her work was mostly for her family and God rather than describing the injustices of the world. Bradstreet also preempted the world’s criticism on her achievement in her poem “The Prologue” by saying that her hands are not fit for writing poems but for sewing clothes in her lines “Who say my hand a needle better fits, A poet’s pen all scorn I should thus wrong” (Bradstreet 208). She strongly held Puritan beliefs which are revealed when she related things such as nature, motherhood, family, happiness and sorrows to God. Bradstreet has great influence on society through her poetry. Certain texts from the 19th and 20th century such as Twain’s The Adventures of Tom Sawyer and Fitzgerald’s The Great Gatsby can be compared with Bradstreet’s poems because they involved the feminine responsibilities of marriage, family life, religious faith, and female empowerment.
Marriage is a very important event in everyone’s life. This ritual confers respect and honor in society. Bradstreet’s life and poetry deal a lot with marriage. Anne Bradstreet was married to Simon Bradstreet at the age of sixteen (Baym 207). In her poem “To My Dear and Loving Husband,” Bradstreet wrote, “I prize thy love more than whole mines of Gold,” showed her spiritual love for her husband (Bradstreet 226). Puritan marriages were not just a ritual; it was a soul relation which cannot be separated. According to the Article “Relational Virtue: Anne Bradstreet, Edward Taylor, and Puritan Marriage,” Furey describes the importance of marriage in Puritan beliefs. Commitment between them was the sole guardian which resulted into a happy married life through unity (Furey, 203). Furey also described “Relational Virtue” in Puritan marriages (203). The concept of “Relational Virtue” states Puritans’ way of determining someone’s ethical, morals, and religious beliefs through an evaluation of the manner he or she engaged in his or her married life (Furey 203). If he or she was honest with his or her partner, it was considered that he or she would also be true in his or her Puritan religion. Today, the marriages in the United States have been covered in the blanket of glamor rather than having a married life the way Puritans had (Furey 202). 
Being a 17th century poet Bradstreet’s literary work can be compared with F. Scott Fitzgerald’s The Great Gatsby. Fitzgerald described change in marriage and love in the 20th century. Daisy married a rich man to get high society status but she never proved honest love for her husband. Gatsby used illegal ways to become rich in order to win Daisy. This showed his selfish love when later in the story we see that that Gatsby’s instincts ruined his desires to get Daisy. He was disturbed with the feeling that after getting Daisy, he would have nothing to achieve in his life. Marriage became a play thing in the hands of rich people. Daisy and her husband’s affairs while married revealed their deceitful nature. In my personal experience, I also came across many cases of divorce that lacked personal commitment and true love in life. A very interesting case came from my attorney when a beautiful 27 year old girl wanted to get a divorce from her husband for the reason that she got a boyfriend from a rich family. In comparison to Bradstreet’s literary work, her married life proved an ever- lasting and honest love for her husband. This shows a change of love and inter-relationships of individuals along with change in time. Materialistic love has overpowered Spiritual love in the 21st century. 
Anne Bradstreet showed feminine characteristics in her poetry when she described her motherly behavior for her children in her poem “In Reference to Her Children” (Bradstreet 228). This poem describes the family role in which she was engaged. The poem states that she had eight children whom she loved a lot. She described herself as a nest and her children as birds in her line “I had eight birds hatched in one nest” (Bradstreet 228). She also stated that she saved all her children from predators by saying, “Lest this my brood some harm should catch, they fall unaware with fowler’s aware” (Bradstreet 229). According to the article “Engendering Identity: The Disclosure of Familial Education in Anne Bradstreet and Marie De L’incarnation,” Robert argues that Bradstreet’s inspiration tests the “coherent transatlantic identity” by provoking to change our visualization of looking into the connections of mother and child instead of love between man and woman (436). Robert also states that Bradstreet provides us a broader vision of looking into the love of a parent for a child, the love which helps us to link “sexual and cultural reproduction” (436). Robert wants to convey a message that we must have main focus on our family which will help us to prove our identity in the world (436). The reason of establishing an identity in the society influenced Bradstreet to write domestic type of poetry in the 17th century.
Bradstreet’s motherly characteristic can be compared with Mark Twain’s book The Adventures of Tom Sawyer. In Bradstreet’s poem “Before the Birth of One of Her Child,” she requested her husband to not get a stepmother for her children after her death (Bradstreet 226). This showed her insecurity for her children. In comparison to Twain’s book, The Adventures of Tom Sawyer, Tom was an orphan who lived with his Aunt, Polly. He was always punishments by his Aunt on small mistakes. This shows that motherly love is the only place for a child where he or she can hide his or her false deeds and learns how to become a good person for a society. This is the reason why Bradstreet didn’t want a stepmother for her children because she might not care for her children as whole as devotedly as she did. In contrast to motherly love, there are also some women who deprive their children for other benefits. Daisy in The Great Gatsby never showed a deep love, like Bradstreet, to her daughter. She was seen so out of herself only because of money or a search for love. In the 21st century, we cannot claim that Bradstreet’s devotion to her children is common among today’s mothers. Today we can see all kinds of mothers around us, some mothers like Bradstreet, some like Daisy, some stepmothers who never care for their husband’s children, and some stepmothers who treat their husband’s children fairly. Thus, Bradstreet’s approach to motherhood can be controversial in the modern world.
Bradstreet was a true Puritan because she related every concept of her poetry with God or Heaven. Her blind faith showed her religious purpose of writing poetry. It has been revealed in her biography that like other good Puritans she performed her daily tasks by following good moral principles through her conscience (Baym 207). She also claimed that her poetry is not based on some arbitrary concepts but the fact that she saw God with her eyes (Baym 207). Bradstreet proved her religious beliefs with her saying “that I see, the vast frame of heaven and the earth, the order of all things, night and day, summer and winter, spring and autumn, the daily providing for this great household upon the earth, the preserving and directing of all to its proper end” (Baym 207). In her poem “Upon the Burning of Our House,” Bradstreet never blamed God even though she was in trouble (232). She assures herself that there is a better place for her in Heaven with her lines “Thou hast an house on high erect, Framed by that mighty Almighty” (Bradstreet 233). Therefore being a woman of the 17th century, she never kept herself between walls; she spread her words through education and religion.
In comparison to the 20th century literary work of The Great Gatsby, we see religious symbols of Christianity. According to the article “Gatsby, The Figure of the Host,” Bordewyk related the scene of Gatsby’s loneliness after his party. The phrases such as “wafer of a moon,” “the figure of the host” and “his hand up in a formal gesture of farewell” has been associated with Eucharist (Bordewyk, 142). Thus, the article argues that this exaggerated scene of Gatsby’s isolation describes the “ironic role of a priest celebrating the sacrament and conferring a benediction on [Gatsby’s] flock” (Bordewyk, 142). Dilworth in his article “The Passion of Gatsby: Evocation of Jesus in Fitzgerald’s THE GREAT GATSBY,” equated Gatsby with Jesus. Dilworth claims that Gatsby is no less of a figure than Jesus because Gatsby sacrificed his life for Daisy’s sin (par.1). Daisy hit Myrtle accidentally which cannot be included in the category of wickedness but fleeing from the incident is an evil as well as a crime (Dilworth par. 3). Thus, the article related Gatsby’s character with Jesus because of the fact of sacrificing his life for someone else (Dilworth, par. 2). We can say that living either in the 17th or 20th century, religious symbol increases our faith in God’s reality of this world regardless of the ups and downs in our life. 
Bradstreet leads to female empowerment in the 17th century. She had rheumatic fever in her childhood and she also risked death eight times during her pregnancy as described in her biography (Baym 207). Bradstreet showed female feature in which she was not encouraged to face hardships of her life, and she always felt death and prayed God to accept her in Heaven (Baym 207). I feel that instead of facing troubles in life, Bradstreet was very brave who showed path to other women’s of the 17th century to raise their voice in men’s world. According to the article “‘My Body / Not To Either State Inclined’: Early American Women Challenge Feminist Criticism,” Schweitzer states the criticism that female faced in the 17th century. Feminine knowledge was not given importance as compared to male writers which lead to delay in exposing an American literary work to the world with women power and encouragement (Schweitzer par. 1). Schweitzer further stated that women writers used the Bible as their weapon to influence audience with their poetry (Schweitzer par. 3). Thus, the use of religion was very important for arousing empowerment and valuing women’s talent in literature. It can be said that everyone faces ups and downs in life, since life goes with sorrows and happiness, but fighting against miserable moments encourage us to overcome all problems of life. 
We can relate Bradstreet’s poetry with the 21st century’s American traits. Bradstreet’s poetry for her husband and children made us to think about Individualists’ literary work because she was mostly concerned about her family matters. She was not aware of worldly affairs so she wrote most of her poetry to tell people how she feels about her husband and her sorrows of her family life. She also showed the trait of Freedom of Religion by appreciating God whether she was in blissful or depressed situations in her life. She followed her religious beliefs without any restrictions. Women empowerment leads to Innovation, even though she didn’t wrote directly about a female power. Regardless of all criticism, she successfully built her position in an American literature and encouraged other women to raise their voices in the order to be recognized in the world. Thus, Bradstreet’s poetry is very influential to discuss female characteristics which involve the protagonists of married life, love for children, religious practice, and empowerment of women.
					




















Work Cited
Baym, Nina. ed. The Norton Anthology of American Literature. 8th ed. Vol A. New York:Norton, 2012. 207. Print.
Bradstreet, Anne. “Before the Birth of One of Her Child.” The Norton Anthology of American Literature. Gen. ed. Nina Baym. 8th ed. Vol A. New York:Norton, 2012. 225-226. Print.
--- “In Reference to Her Children.” The Norton Anthology of American Literature. Gen. ed. Nina Baym. 8th ed. Vol A. New York:Norton, 2012. 228-230. Print.
--- “The Prolouge.” The Norton Anthology of American Literature. Gen. ed. Nina Baym. 8th ed. Vol A. New York:Norton, 2012. 208-209. Print.
--- “To My Dear and Loving Husband.” The Norton Anthology of American Literature. Gen. ed. Nina Baym. 8th ed. Vol A. New York:Norton, 2012. 226. Print.
--- “Upon the Burning of Our House.”The Norton Anthology of American Literature. Gen. ed. Nina Baym. 8th ed. Vol A. New York:Norton, 2012. 232-233. Print.
Bordewyk, Gordon. "Gatsby, The Figure Of The Host." American Notes And Queries 17.9 (1979): 141-143. EBSCO Publishing Citations. Web. 9 Nov. 2014.
Dilworth, Thomas. "The Passion Of Gatsby: Evocations Of Jesus In Fitzgerald's The Great Gatsby." The Explicator 68.2 (2010): 119-121. EBSCO Publishing Citations. Web. 9 Nov. 2014.
Fitzgerald, F. Scott. The Great Gatsby. Public Book Shelf. PublicBookshelf Corporation., n.d. Web. 18 Nov. 2014.
Furey, Constance. "Relational Virtue: Anne Bradstreet, Edward Taylor, And Puritan Marriage." Journal Of Medieval & Early Modern Studies 42.1 (2012): 201-224. Academic Search Complete. Web. 26 Oct. 2014.
Hilliker, Robert. "Engendering Identity: The Discourse Of Familial Education In Anne Bradstreet And Marie De L'incarnation." Early American Literature 42.3 (2007): 435-470. Academic Search Complete. Web. 26 Oct. 2014.
Kerr, Frances. "Feeling `Half Feminine': Modernism And The Politics Of Emotion In The Great Gatsby." American Literature 68.2 (1996): 405. Academic Search Complete. Web. 9 Nov. 2014.
Schweitzer, Ivy. "My Body / Not To Either State Inclined": Early American Women Challenge Feminist Criticism." Early American Literature 44.2 (2009): 405-410. Academic Search Complete. Web. 26 Oct. 2014.
Twain, Mark (Samuel Clemens). The Adventures of Tom Sawyer. Gutenberg Ebook. David Widger, 20 Aug. 2006. Web. 18 Nov. 2014. 

